TEA 
57.2.8.6h. 

GENERAL OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

OF THE 803B COMPUTER 

Before beginning any specific operation 
the operator who is unfemiliar with the 
machine is recommended to read right 
through the instructions concerned, to 
get an overall idea of what is to be done. 

INTRODUCTION 

TYPICAL OPERATION 

X Switch On 
2 Release Buttons 
3 Clear Store 
h Normal 

.5 Operate 
6 Wait 

S Read or Obey 
8 Clear Store 
9 Load Reader 

0  Read 
1 Word Generctor 
2 Operate 
3 Normal 
h Operate 
5 Next Step 
6 Next Steps 
T Finishing 
8 Switching Off 

PN MDD MDD DD MU M 



3. KEYBOARD 

3.1 Power Switches 
3.2 Program Operating Controls 
343 Word Generator 

PAPER TAPE OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS 

Power Switching 
Tape Reader 
Loading Tape into the Punch 
Operation 
Reader Lamp 
Hold-up Lamp 
Errors 
Reproducer Controls on Paper Tape 
Stations Types 1 and 2 

.9 Further Details of Paper Tape Station 
Type 3 

.10 Tape Winder 

SWITCHING AND TESTING 

Sl Switching On 
5.2 Test Programs 
5.3 Switching Off 

MAINTENANCE 

6.1 Elliott Tape Reader 
6.2 Teletype Punch 

FUSES 

Tl Positions of Fuses 

:h e 

BDA DW Fw e 



T.2 Method for Tracing Fuse Failures 

8. LAMPS IN SWITCH BUTTONS 

8.3 Removing Lamp 
8.2 Replacing Lemp 

APPENDIX 1 

FUSES IN FILM EQUIPMENT 

APPENDIX 2 

FUSES IN CARD READER AND LINE PRINTER 

- iii - 



T.1.8. 
57.2.8.6h, 

1. INTRODUCTION 

An 803B installation consists of: 

(i) Cabinets containing electronic equipment, 

(ii) A paper tape station (Figure 1), 

(iii) A keyboard (Figure 2), 

(iv) A bettery charger, 

Associated with the basic installation there may be 

(v) Other peripheral equipment if required, 

(vi) Usually, some air conditioning equipment. 

During normal operation an operator will use the paper tape 
equipment and the controls on the paper tape station and on the keyboard, 
This description is concerned with this operation, and the maintenance for 
which the operator can be responsible. 

2. TYPICAL OPERATION 

This section is planned to help the novice by showing a typical 
sequence of operations. When this particular seguence is understood, many 
other operating sequences may be regerded (at first) as varistions from it 
and some of the other sections of this document may be seen to be explaining 
what heppens when the controls ere used, and why elternative sequences must 
sometimes be used. 

Before reading these typical instructions, the reader should 
look et all of the illustrations, so that he (or she) knows the names of 
the various parts of the installation. 

The sequence is shown in Figure 3. It assumes that the equipment 
is not switched on. 



NOTE Apart from the BATTERY ON and OFF and the COMPUTER ON and OFF 
buttons in the top line of the Keyboard, it is impossible to 
danage the computer by making a mistake in using the Keyboard. 
But if anybody has any work stored in the computer, wrong use 
of these controls may make that work worthless, 

2.1  Switch On 

The details of the switching-on process will depend upon the 
particular installation, and it will be necessary to refer to section 4.1 
below, The instructions refer to the BATTERY ON button and the COMPUTER ON 
button: they are indicated in Figure 3. 

2.2  Release Buttons 

The instruction to press the four RELEASE buttons will ensure 
that the Word Generator (the four rows of buttons on the left of the Keyboard) 
is "cleared" of any instruction that mey have been left by somebody else. 

2.3 Clear Store 

Instructions 3 to 8 in this list will not nlways be followed: 
there are times when they will be quite incorrect. So a beginner must first 
obtein permission from the Operator in charge, Pressing the CLEAR STORE 
button sets the switch (the button remains down) so that the Keyboard is ready. 

2.h Normal 

This is one of the three alternatives "READ", "NORMAL" and "OBEY", 
If it is down already, nothing happens when it is pressed: if one of the 
others is down, that one comes up and the NORMAL button remains down. 

2.5 Operate 

The operations already mentioned have prepared the instruction 
to be given to the computer, but the instruction is not passed to it until 
the OPERATE bar is pressed. This gives time for setting the buttons, checking 
them and changing the setting if a mistake is found. 

57.2.8.6h, 



2.6 Wait 

The computer takes some seconds to clear all of the thousands 
of locations in the store, one by one. 

2.7 Read or Obey 

Either of these will stop the computer, 

2.8 Clear Store 

This button is pressed to release it. 

2.9  Load Reader 

Instructions are given in section 4.2 belew. 

2,10 Read 

The next instruction to the computer will be to read the word 
generator (the buttons on the left) into its Instruction Register. 

2,11 Word Generstor 

Against each button (except "B") there is a number. 1If a 
button is down it indicetes this number: if it is up it indicates zero. 
The number passed to the computer is the total of these numbers in the 
particular series of buttons. The first number is from O to 7 ( 4 + 2 + 1) 
inclusive, the second from O to 7, and the third from O to 8191, (B cen be 
ignored at present). The instruction is to be 40 0, so only the first h is 
pressed. It remains down (as shown). 

2,12 Qperate 

The computer resds instruction 40 O into its Instruction Register 
and waits for the next instruction. 

5T7+2.8.64. 



2.13 Normel 

This will cause the computer, when told to operate, to operate 
normelly. 

2.1k Operate 

The computer operrtes normeall; s cbeying the instruction in its 
instruction reglster (which is 40 O, causing it to go to the first instruction 
in Location No.O in the store, and to continue automatlcally) It reads the 
paper tape into the store. 

2.15 Hext Step 

What happens next depends upon the details of the program on the 
tape it has just read. The computer mey emit a high-pitched steady note 
(the DYNAMIC STOP, showing that it has Tinished what it had to do) or it may 
make irregular sounds, often following a recogniseble pattern, and give some 
output such as paper tape from the punch or words on the teleprinter, 

2,16 lext Steps 

There are so many uses for the computer that it is difficult to 
glve "tjplcal" operations any further. Very often the first tepe will merely 
give the computer instructions for reading, storing and using futher tapes. 
A second tape mey give it very general instructions for a great veriety of 
complicated operations such as long methematical calculations. A third tape 
may give it the program for performing these operations upen the data which 
will follow. &A fourth tepe might then bring into the computer the words and 
the numbers upon which the work has to be done, These tepes must be used in 
the correct order, and for each the detailed instructions will be given in 
wrltlng on & sheet of paper which must be returned with the paper tape (and, 
in some ceses, with the computer output). The instructions are likely to 
resenble Numbers 9 to 14 in the typical series of operations in Figure 3. If 
the setting of the Word Generator has to be changed, the old setting can be 
cleared by pressing the red buttons on the left, before pressing the buttons 
for the new setting. 

(CAUTION. "Clear the Number Generator” does WOT mean "Clear Store™!) 

57.2.8.6h, 



2,17 Finishing 

The instructions supplied with the program will say what action 
the computer will take to show that it hes finished the work it had to do. 
There will then be some "tidying up" to be done: input tapes will have to 
be wound up end put in their proper places: if a punch has given an output 
on paper tepe, the appropriate RUNOUT button must be pressed until some 
inches of tape have been produced with a single line of holes, and then the 
tepe is torn off anywhere in this length, wound up and either sent away to 
the user, or put into a teleprinter for "printing up", according to 
instructions. 

Finally, if the computer is likely to be used again within an 
hour or so, it will usually be left running ready for the next user. 

2.18 Switching Off 

See section L.l for instructions for switching off. 

3. KEYBOARD 

By means of the keyboard, which is shown in Figure 2, the 
operator can (&) switch the computer on and off, (b) control the running of 
progrems, and (c) insert numbers (or instructions) in the binary representation 
used within the machine. Certain indications of the state of the machine or 
the program run are also given, 

3.1 Power Switches 

These are the Battery and Computer On and Off buttons the use of 
which is described in section L.,  When both battery and computer are on, the 
keyboerd is illuminated by strip lights behind a diffusing screen. 

3.2  Program Operating Controls 

In this group mey be included the following controls: 

Operate Bar (push), 

57.2.8.6h. 



Read, Normal and Obey buttons (interlocked), 

Selected Stop button (push-push), 

Clear Store button (push-push), 

fystem Reset button (push), 

Manual Data button (push-push). 

Controls described as "push" return up as soon as pressure is 
removed: those described as "push-push" alternately remain down and return 
up: of the three described as "interlocked" one is alweys down, each one 
vhen pressed releasing the others end itself remaining down. These controls 
must never be pressed through less than their full travel. 

3.2.1 Read, Normal and Obey Buttons and Operate Bar 

These three buttons are mechanically interlocked so that only one 
can be down at a time, futomatie running of a program requires that the 
Hormal button shall be down; pressing either of the others will cause the 
machine to stop with the next instruction waiting in the instruction register., 

If the Obey button has been pressed, pressing the Operate bar 
will cause the instruction to be obeyed, after which the machine stops again. 
This type of operation is called step-by-step working, If the Read button 
has been pressed, pressing the Operate ber causes the instruction set on the 
F1 and W1 buttons of the word genmerator (Section 3.3) to replace the content 
of the instruction register. The Step-by-Step lamp lights when either 
button is pressed. 

Thus the sequence Read, Operate, Obey, Operate will cause the 
machine to obey the instruction set on the word generator instead of that at 
which it stopped. 

To resume automatic running after either the Read or the Obey 
button has been pressed, press the Normal button and then the Operate bar. 

57.2.8.64, 



3.2.2 Selected Stop Button 

If the Selected Stop Button is pressed during automatic 
running of a program, the program will continue to run until either 
instruction is received in the instruction register from the location 
specified by the N2 buttons of the word generator (Section 3.3). The 
machine then stops with this instruction waiting to be obeyed, (Usually 
the machine stops on the first instruction of the pair, but it will stop on 
the second instruction if this is reached by a control transfer.) 

The instruction is obeyed when the Operste bar is pressed, and 
if the next instruction is from the same location the machine will stop., As 
soon as the current instruction comes from a different location (either as a 
result of a jump, or in the normel sequence) the machine continues 
eutomatically until the selected location is again reached. 

When the machine has reached a selected stop the Step-by-Step 
lanp lights and step-by-step working may be commenced by pressing the Obey 
button as explained in the preceding section, 

3.2.3 Clear Store Button 

This button is mounted in a guard ring to prevent accidental 
operation. The effect of pressing the button once is to fill the store 
(epart from locations O to 3 which are protected) with parity-checked zeros. 
The button also has the same effect as the System Reset button (see below), 
except thet its use does not stop the machine. Pressing the button e 
second time restores normel operating conditions. 

The correct procedure for clearing the store is as follows: 

Press Obey 

Press Clear Store (the button stays down) 

Press Normal 

Press Operate 

Wait at least 6 seconds (L096-word store) or 12 seconds (8192-word store) 

Press Obey 

Press Clear Store (to release). 

57.3.8,.6h. 

-3 



The reason for pressing the Obey button at the end of this sequence is that 
otherwise the machine will attempt to obey the initial instructions. 

3.2.4  System Reset Button 

This button is mounted in a guard ring. It is used 

(a) To stop the read cycle when a pure binary tape has been 
read, end 

() To clear within the machine certain comtrol conditions 
vhich may be set up as a result of e mechine fault or a 
program error and which cannot be cleared by the program 
itself, It should not be used unless such an error 
condition occurs (as indicated by keyboard lamps). 

Pressing the button causes the current instruction to be completed 
(not necessarily correctly) and clears the peripheral busy, interrupt and 
fixed-point overflow conditions. It alsc suppresses any block transfer 
instructions in peripheral controllers, although it does not affect the 
internal conditions of peripheral devices, the individual reset buttons on 
these devices being provided for this purpose. 

The Overflow, Busy and Block Transfer lamps are extinguished when 
the System Reset Button is pressed, and the machine is left in the step-by-step 
state with the next instruction in the instructicn register. 

3.2.5 Manual Data Button 

If this button is pressed once, the couputer stops when a T0 
instruction is reached, and the Busy lamp is 1lit. The purpose of this 
button is to allow the operator to set a word on the word generator (section 
3.3) without the risk of being overtaken by the program. Pressing the 
Operate bar allows the TO instruction to be obeyed, and the machine then runs 
until the next 70 instruction is reached. To restore normal conditions the 
Manual Data button is pressed a second time. 

5T7.2.8.64. 



306 Indicator Lamps and Loudspeaker 

Most of the indicator lemps heve been mentioned in the preceding 
sections. The Step-by-Step lamp lights whenever the machine is stopped by 
the Read, Obey, Selected Stop or System Reset operation, or by the detection 
of a store parity error or floating-point overflow. These last two are 
distinguished by their corresponding lemps. 

The Busy lamp lights whenever the machine is held up by a busy 
peripheral device, or when a function 70 is detected while the Manual Data 
button is in use. The Block Transfer lamp lights during any long function, 
€.g. one of those in group 5, but in practice it is unlikely to be observed 
except during a function TT7. 

The Floating-point Overflow lemp is inoperative except in 
floating-point machines. 

The loudspesker circuit receives a pulse every time any instruction 
of groups h to 7 is obeyed. Consequently the tone emitted depends upon the 
frequency of these instructions in the program. The engineer is recommended 
to familierise himself with the sound of test progrems, since en unusual 
sound may well be the first indication of a fault. The velume control. beside 
the loudspeaker grill should on this account be set to maximum when test 
programs are being run. 

3.3 Word Generator 

The word generator is a set of 39 buttons representing the 39 
digits of a computer word. For operating convenience the buttons are 
arranged in four rows corresponding to the four parts of an instruction pair: 

Fl (six buttons) 

N1 and B (fourteen buttons) 

F2 (six buttons) 

n2 (thirteen buttons) 

All of the buttons pressed down will remain down until the red 
button at the left-hand end of the row is pressed to release them. 

5T.3.8.6h. 



The word generator may be used as en input device (by function 70), 
the 39-digit pattern being placed in the accumulator. The Fl and N1 buttons 
provide a source of instructions when the Read and Obey buttons are used 
(Section 3.2.1). The N2 buttons are used to specify an address for selected 
stop operation (Section 3.2.2). 

h, PAPER TAPE OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS 

There are three designs of paper tope station: 
the Type 1 has provision for one tape reader and one punch, the Type 2 has 
provision for two readers and two punches, and the Type 3 has provision for 
two readers, two punches end a teleprinter and can cperate in either the 
5-hole or 8-hole mode. Operation of the three types is similar, except that 
the Types 2 and 3 have independent controls for readers and punches. The 
control panels are shown in Figure 4 (Type 1), Figure 5 (Type 2) end 
Figure 6 (Type 3). A third form, Type 24, is similar to Type 2, but includes 
& directly coupled teleprinter in place of the off-line telenrlnt:r. 

4.1 Power Switching 

To operate the paper tape station the power cabinet must first be 
switched on (Section 5.1). 

With the Paper Tape Station in the Auto mode, its supplies are 
automatically switched on when the computer is switched on at the Keyboard. 
If the OFF button on the control panel lights it is an indication that power 
supplies are availeble, but that the Paper Tape Station is in the Manual 
node.  Press the Manual button and then the On button. The Off button 
light goes out and the On button lights, indicating that supplies are now 
switched on and thet the Paper Tape Station is ready for operation. 

To switch off press the Off button; this is effective whether 
the peper tape station is in the automstic or manual mode. If it is in the 
automatic mode its supplies will be removed nutcmatlcally when the computer 
is switched off at the keyboard. Note thet it is possible to run the Creed 
equipment on Type 1 and 2 stations when the computer power is off provided 
thet the Off button is lit. 

5T.3.8.64., 

= 0 



4.2  Tape Reader 

4.2.1  Adjustment for Tape Width 

The tape reader mey be adjusted for different tape widths by 
moving the load bar away from or towerds the body of the reader, The 
correct setting must be mede for the tape width to be used, S5-track tape 
without printing is accepted with the bar pushed fully in; 5-track tepe with 
printing or T-track tape is accepted with the bar pulled out to the first 
notch, and 8-track tape is accepted with the bar pulled fully out. 

4.2.2  Loading Tape into the Reader 

First check that the end to be placed in the reader is the 
leading end. To avoid possible confusion this should be clearly indicated 
by e written or printed mark. Meny library programs have their code punched 
in plain language (i.e. directly readsble characters) at the leading end. 
Do not feed these punchings through the reader unless this action is known to 
be correct, The main part should be rolled up evenly and placed on the 
spindie provided in a tape holder to the right of the reader. 

Hold the tape with the leading end in the left hand and place it 
along the edge of the chromium plated table at the front of the tape reader, 
Ensure thet the tape is the correct way up with the sprocket hole occupying 
position h reading from back to front (that is towards the operator). It 
should be noted that this is the reverse of 803A practice end the correct 
positioning of the tape should be carefully checked from Figure T. 

Hold the tape on the table with the tips of the index fingers 
while at the same time depressing the black load bar with the thumbs. Keeping 
the bar fully depressed slide the tape evenly under the cepstan roller end 
brake pad until it touches the rear guide pins. 

If it is desired to start at a specific character the row of 
holes denoting the character to be read must be located IMMEDIATELY TO THB 
RIGHT OF THE CLEAR SLOT COVERING THE PHOTOCELLS. Normally, however, tapes 
start with 2a lead of blank tape, and provided the blank portion is under the 
lamp it need not be carefully positioned longitudinally. 

57.2.8,64, 

- 11 - 



NOTE If the reader Runout button is pressed in order to run a 
portion of the tape through without reading it, the Reeder 
lamp will light and the reader will not respond to the Read 
button. After using the Runout button for this purpose, 
press the Load bar on the reader (as if a new tape were being 
inserted) and it will be found that the reader will then 
respond to the Read button. 

4.2.3 To Remove a Tape from the Reader 

Fully depress the load bar and slide the tape forward until 
it is clear of the capstan roller and brake pad.  Alternatively, the 
Run-out button, which is located on the tape reader itself, may be used, 
PROVIDED THE TAPE IS NOT TORN OR FOLDED. 

WARNINGS Do not allow the tepe reader to run without tape 
because prolonged contact between the capsten and 
the clutch rollers will cause serious damage. 
Do not write marks on the tape under the optical 
system: sooner or later the lens will be damaged. 
Never have 2 tape standing in the reader for a long 
time. The heat will meke it brittle. 

b.2.4  Tape Reader motor switch 

The switch to the left of the nameplate switches the motor on 
and off. It is generally left in the On position so that the tape reader 
motor starts and stops when the computer is switched on and off. If the 
computer is left on but the tape reader is not in use for a long period, it 
is recormended that the tape reader should be switched off, Do not switch 
the reader on or off while n program is running. 

The main purpose of the switch is to ensble the motor to be 
switched off quickly should a tape become jammed in the reader. It is 
important to note that, in the event of this oecurrence, the program will 
have to be read into the computer again, 

57.2.8.6h. 



4.3 Loading Tape into the Punch 

The punch is adjusted for S-hole or 8-hole tape by turning the 
capstan shown in Figure 8. The setting is shown by engravings visible 
through an eperture at the end of this sub-assembly, 

The method of loading a fresh spool of blank tape into the 
punch will be made clear by reference to Figure 8. Switch the Paper Tape 
Station into the Manual state. Lift the spring loaded arm end place the 
spool with its projecting shafts in the carriage slots. Return the spring 
loaded arm to its operating position, gently resting on the outer surface of 
the tape. Feed the tape through the eye in the tensioning arm and around 
the jockey rollers, then make sure the end of the tape is torn cleanly, and 
thread it through the punch block. Check for correct operation by 
momentarily depressing the Run-out button located on the control penel. 

During the loading operation the paper tape station should be in 
the Manual mode, When the spring-loaded arm is ellowed to close, the Run- 
out lamp lights to indicate that the punch cannot be operated by the Computer. 
After the insertion of a new reel of tape the Run-out lamp must be 
extinguished by switching to Auto before the punch is opersble. 

4.4 Operation 

Having first checked that the supply of tape in the punch is 
adequate, place the program tape in the tape reader, On pressing the load 
bar the lamp in the Reader button lights indicating that the tape resder is 
in the load phese. 

Press Reader button. The tape moves forward one character, and 
the character that was initially positioned over the mask is read into the 
buffer store. Also the Reader lamp is extinguished showing that the load 
phase is complete. During the load phase the paper tape station cannot 
accept reader instructions from the computer, and hence there is no need to 
g0 to Manual for this operation, 

In the paper tape stations Types 2 and 3 there are two Reader 
buttons, and the controls of the two readers are independent. Hence while 

57.2.8.6k, 

= < — 



one reader is being loaded the other remains operational, The Run-out 
buttons on the control panel affect the tape punches only (there are two 
punch run-out buttons on the Types 2 and 3 control panel). 

The Manual button is positioned to the left of the Reader button 
on the control panel (Figures h to 6). The Manual switch is of the push- 
push type. When the paper tape station is in the menual mode it is icoleted 
from the computer and indication of this is given by the illuminstion of the 
button.  When it is pressed again the light is extinguished indicating that 
the paper tape station is in the automatic mode, that is, completely under 
computer control. 

To halt the operation of the paper tape station press the Manuel 
button. Both reader and punch cease to operate, and any subsequent reasder 
or punch instruction will stop the computer., If an instruction is held up 
by the paper tape station being in the Menuel mode, the Hold-up lamp lights, 
but the instruction will be corrcctly executed when the tape stetion is 
returned to the sutonatic mode. Hote that when the punch is operating at 
full speed the Hold-up lamp will remein on almost continuously. 

4.5 Reader Lamp 

When the yellow button marked Reader is illuminated it shows that 
an error has been detected (Section 4.7), or that the tape station is in the 
load phase. After correcting an crror shown in this wey it is necessary to 
press the load bar and to complete the load phase sequence as described in 
Section h.2. 

k.6  Hold-up Lemp 

This is illuminated when a read or punch instruction is given by 
the computer and cannot be executed. A check should be made of the following 
possible causes and action teken as indicated. 

(a) Tape Reader Error. See Section h.7. 

() Paper tape station in manual mode. If the Manual 
button is illuminsted it should be pressed; the light 
is then extinguished and the tape station reverts to the 
automatic mode. 

57.2.8.6k4. 

s 7 « 



(c) Availoble blank tape in punch nearing exhaustion, 
indicated by illumination of the Run-out button. 

h.T  Errors 

The paper tape station will detect the following types of error, 
indication being given by the illuminetion of the Reader lamp in cach case. 

The mix of two characters due to creep. 

Jitter due either to bounce in the mechanism or to bad edges on 
the holes in the tepe. 

When the reader stops because an error has been detected the 
tepe should be examined in the region of the last few characters read. Its 
condition may werrant the use of a new program tape. 

Repositioning the tape or inserting a nev tape will require the 
load phese sequence to be carried out egein. In the course of this the 
depression of the load bar autometically clears the buffer store, thus 
preventing erronecus data from reaching the computer. 

4.8 Reproducer Controls on Paper Tape Stations Types 1 and 2 

Buttons controlling the Creed Teleprinter. and its sssociated 
transmitter are grouped on the right of the paper station control panel 
(Figures h and 5). 

The green push-push button illuminetes when pressed to switch 
the reproducer power supplies on. Its action is independent of the On/Off 
switch located on the left of the control panel which switches supplies to 
the reader and punch, 

The Auto button is illuminated when the teleprinter is under the 
control of the transmitter. 

The adjecent Step button is not illuminated, Vhen it is pressed 
only a single character is read. It must always be pressed as an intermediste 
step in the transition from Auto to Manual. 

57.2.8.6k4, 

= .- 



Illumination of the Manual button indicates that the teleprinter 
is under manual control. 

4.9  Further Details of Paper Tape Station Type 3 

The Type 3 paper tape station can have two readers, two punches 
and a teleprinter. 

4.9.1  Control Panel 

Some versions of the Paper Tape Station Type 3 have three three— 
way switches, as shown at the right-hand side of Figure 6, so thet either 
output chennel can be connected to Punch 1, Punch 2 or Teleprinter. This 
switching must be done BEFORE a program begins, 

Some versions of the Type 3 Paper Tepe Station have a fourth 
switch, to the right of those shown. This makes it possible to isolate 
the teleprinter from the computer so that it can be used for preparing tapes 
or printing them out. 

4.9.2  Teleprinter 

Full instructions for the teleprinter will be found in the 
instruction book provided by its makers, The operator will be responsible 
for seeing that there is always sufficient paper in the machine for the work 
it has to do. 

4,10 Tepe Winder 

Tepe passes from the reeder or the punch into a bin, which is 
under the slatted top of the paper tape station. It is usual to hang the 
treiling end of each tape carefully over the side of the bin (or over a 
slat) so that it is available for rewinding, Tapes are normelly re-wound 
from the trailing end, so that the leading end is on the outside ready for 
use next time, and then held together by the use of a rubber band. A new 
operator hes to learn how to avoid knots, tengles snd other damage to tapes, 
and should not attempt to work at the same speed as a more experienced user. 
Any damage (obvious or suspected) must be reported immediately. 

57.2.8.6h4, 

=16 = 



CAUTION Before using the tape winder, ALWAYS inspect 
the disc. Youmay "put the brake on" by 
touching it with your finger, and a sharp 
edge cen cut you. ENSURE THE RIM IS SMOOTH, 
Take care not to drop the disc or damage it. 
Report any chipping or cracking of the disc, 

5. SWITCHING AND TESTING 

5.1 Switching On 

(a) Switch Mains on. The fans will start up. 

(v) Fully depress the Battery On button on the keyboard. 
Check output from battery charger at the meter on the 
charger cabinet, if there is one. 

Fully depress the Computer On button (on the keyboard). 
The keyboard screen lamps will light up. 

Check whether the Off button on the Paper Tape Station 
is illuminated. If not, the station is fully operational 
and in the sutomatic mode, If the button is illuminated, 
press the On button and then the -Manual button. 

Check that the reader and punch motor switches are on. 

(€] Ensure that the punch is loaded with tape. 

(g) After switching on, it is usual to run the test tape. 

57+2.8.6k. 

= VE m 



5.2 Test Programs 

The following test programs should be run daily: 

X1, X2, X3: if Floating Point is included, X5: 

if the On-Line Teleprinter is included, X8: 

if the installation includes a Card Reader end/or a Film Store, 
the appropriate test progrems (X4 and X7 respectively) should 
be run weekly. 

Operating instructions for these programs are published separataly, and it 
is important that ell operators make themselves thoroughly conversant with 
the tests. 

5.3 Switching Off 

(a) If the Paper Tape Station is on Manual, switch this 
off first. 

() When the Paper Tape Station is on Auto, fully depress 
keyboard Computer Off button, 

(e) Depress Battery Off button. 

(¢) Switch meins off. 

6. MATHTENANCE 

Maintenance and adjustments require the services of a skilled 
engineer(for whom this leaflet is not primarily intended). However, the 
operator's responsibilities include the following, 

57.2.8,6k4, 

« 18 = 



6.1 Elliott Tape Reader 

6.1.1 Cleaning 

For proper operation, readers must be kept clean. Where 
conditions are bad, readers should be cleaned as often as necessary, but in 
any circumstances they should alwsys be cleaned daily as follows: 

:” The light mask and the platform should be dusted with 
a camel-hair brush. 

a The lower edge of the prism should be wiped with a 
lint-free rag only. 

Covers are provided for the tape readers, end these should always 
be put on the units when they are not in use. Dirty conditions near the tape 
readers can cause considerable operating difficulties. 

Errors in reading can be caused by dirt (such as chad from 
punching) lodging in the optical peth. It is the operator's responsibility 
to keep this equipment clean. Any more serious fault should be left for 
the engineer to investigate: the operator can change the reader. 

6.1.2 To chenge the Tape Reader 

Switch the peper tape station off as described above. 
Unplug the two connectors at the rear of the tape reader and connect them to 
the replacement reeder, ensuring that threads of both male and female portions 
of the uniters are free from dust or grit, Any particles left on the 
threads will demage them and prevent the uniter from meking proper contact. 
Uniters should not be forced, and care should be teken that the locking rings 
are not cross-threaded. Ensure that the uniters are fully screwed home. 
Switch the paper tape station on again, 

57.2,8.64, 

- U » 



6.2 Teletype Punch 

Chad Box 

The plastic chad box should be erptied regularly. The punch 
knives will be damaged if an over-full box makes the chads jam. 

To change the Punch 

Switch off the paper tape station as described above, 
Unplug the two cables at the rear of the punch and plug them into the 
replacement punch. Switch the paper tape station on again. 

T FUSES 

The operator is provided with a supply of spare fuses and is 
expected in certein circumstances to be able to fit them as replacenents, 
Any such action must be recorded and reported to the engineer, The symptoms 
will usually suggest which fuse or fuses to examine, as outlined below., When 
a fuse has blown, the fact can often be seen if its gless tube is viewed 
against the light, but if there is any doubt a spere can be used in its place, 
as a neans of testing, Any operators who are not sure sbout the method of 
removing and replacing fuses should ask the engineer to show them. 

CAUTIONS 

The rating of each fuse is marked on it. If the value of the 
blown fuse differs from that shown in this list, switch the 
computer off and refer the matter to the engineer. 

NEVER use a fuse with an incorrect rating: for example, 
if a 24 (i.e. 2 anp) fuse is specified, no other value is to be 
used, even for testing. 

ALWAYS SWITCH THE POWER OFF before touching a fuse. 

57.2.8.6k. 

- S0 = 



If the replacement for a blown fuse itself inmediately 
blows on switching on, switch off and send for the engineer, 
Do not attempt & second replacement. 

If it is found to be necessary to use & screwdriver on 
o fuse, choose one with a wide blade, and use it GENTLY. 

7.1 Positions of Fuses 

Operators should know where the fuses are to be found. 

- There are fuses in the main supply: these and their switch are 
sometimes said to be "on the wall" although in some installations they are 
elsevhere. 

\ 

There are fuses FS1 to FST behind the large cover at the reer of 
the peper tape station, as shown in Figure 9. The lamp near each shows 
whether it is allowing current to pass. 

Under the large cover at the front of the paper tape station, at 
the lower right-hend corner (sec Figure 10) there are FS1 and FS2 for the 
-24V power supply. 

There are fuses in most types of battery charger, but as there 
are several types of charger end the fuses may not be accessible to operators 
this subject may be a matter for a local instruction. 

There are fuses in the back and in the front of the corputer 
power cabinet, as shown in Figures 11 and 12. 

There ore fuses in the Store cabinet, os shown in Figure 13, 

If the installation has an 8192-word store, there are five fuses 
in the second store cubicle, as shown in Figure lh. 

57.2.8.64. 

- sM < 



Appendices to this description deal with fuses in additional 
peripheral equipment. 

T.2 Method for Tracing Fuse Failures 

CAUTION 

Please ask your engineer to check the fuse ratings 
in these instructions, and keep them up to date. 
Unless that is done, the list is NOT AUTHORITATIVE, 

(1) If there is ABSOLUTE SILENCE, with no fan working 
A~ anywhere, no power is being received. If you arc 

working by daylight, try switching the lights on to 
see whether it is a complete power feilure. 

(2) COMPUTER SILENT BUT ROOM LIGHTS ARE ON. Is the "switch 
on the wall" properly on? If so, switch it off and 
check the fuses associated with it, 

(3) CENTRAL PROCESSOR FANS OFF, OTHERS ON. Check power 
cabinet (Figure 11), fuses 17 and 18 (15 amps). 

(%) PAPER TAPE STATION FANS OFF, OTHERS ON, Check at the 
rear of the power cabinet (Figure 11), fuses 21 and 22 
(5 anmps). 

(5) FIIM EQUIPMENT FANS OFF, OTHERS ON. Check &t the rear 
of the power cabinet (Figure 11), fuses 19 and 20 (5 amps). 

(6) FANS WORKING, MACHINE DOES WOT RESPOND TO "OW™ BUTTON, 
= Check at the front of the power cabinet (Figure 12), 

fuse 28 (2 emps). 

(1) MACHINE SWITCHES ON BUT WILL NOT REMAIN ON. (Do not 
try too often). Check at the front of the central 
processor (Figurel3), fuses 1 to 25 inclusive, and if 
there is a second store cubicle, check the five fuses 
in it, also (see Figure 14): 

57.2.8.64, 

- 22 - 



FUSES IN STORE CABINET: 

Label Fuse Ratings (amps) 

+10V Link only 

R/W 

AMPS 1-20 

AMPS 21-40 

GEN 1 

GEN 2 

+10V TRIG 10 

=10V Link only 

NL1 7 

BISTABLES 

TH2 10 

TF2 14 

GEN 12 

=20V Link only 

LOG1 1h 
LoG2 

10G3 

oGk 

LOG5 

LoG6 

LOGT 

L0G8 

LOG9 

57.2.8.6h, 

EP SNEV |W  MNM 

mM mM M NM yV N NV mNM m mM om mMNPmE  E mM mM mM |M M 



Cont'd, 

Label Fuse Ratings (amps) 
INHIB 23 

TH2 2h 

GEN 25 5 with certain 
peripherals 

2 or 3 othervise according 
to specification of 
coriputer 

=20V TRIG Fs FL with floating point 

10 otherwise 

FUSES IN SECOND STORE (8192 WORD) CABINET, IF SUPPLIED: 

Label Ratings (emps) 

+10V R/W 2 

+10V AMP 2 

-10V TH2 d 

-20V INHIBIT 

~20V TH2 2: 

Do not be misled by the lebels AMPS1-20 and AMPS21-40: 
these refer to amplifiers! 

57.2.8.6k. 

- Ol s 



PAPER TAPE STATION NOT SWITCHING ON, 

(a) If the lamp in the OFF Lutton does not go on, 
check at the rear of the paper tope station 
(Figure 9), lower left~hand corner, the double 
fuse called FST, mounted in a block with neon 
indicators (5 emps). 

(v) OFF button 1it, check at the rear of the paper 
tape station (Figure 9), fuse € (15 amps) in 26V 
supply, as indicated by the lamp on the seme level. 

At the rear of the paper tape station (Figure 9), 
if any other lamp in the column is not 1lit, check 
the fuse on the seme level. 

500 mA FSh 5 amps 

500 mA FS5 7 amps 
3 amps FS6 15 anps 

Paper tape stations types 2 and 3, check at the 
front (Figure 10) lower right-hand corner, fuses 
FS1 (1 amp) and FS2 (2 amps). 

8. LAMPS IN SWITCE BUTTONS 

If a lamp in & switch button fails it will be so misleading that 
it should be removed and & new one fitted, 

Renember to SWITCH OFF AT THE WALL before attempting to adjust or 
replace any of these lamps. 

57.2.8.6k, 

- 25 - 



8.1 Removing Lamp 

Switch off "at the wall", 

Pull the top of the switch off, 

For removing the lamp, & special tool may be available. It fits 
over the lemp and grips it. Otherwise, a piece of " (6 mn) plastic tubing 
can be used. It is even possible to use a small piece of paper, tightly 
rolled up, but cere must be teken not to leave a fragment of it where it may 
find its wey to the switch contacts. The larp has a wedge-shaped end, and 
pulls stroisht out. Notice carefully which way the end goes, as the new 
lamp must be inserted with the end "facing the same way". 

8.2  Replacing Lamp 

Check that the supply is off "at the wall". 

Hold the lamp so that the wedge-shaped end is the correct vay 
round (probably in all cases with the "sharp edge" from side to side, so that 
it pushes between contacts above end below). Gently press it into place 
with the fingers (no tool is required). Press it right home: when the 
contacts 1ift off the sloping parts on to the parallel sides, it slides more 
easily. Unless it is pressed home, it may shake loose. 

57.2.8.6k, 

- 26 = 



T.I.5.57 

APPENDIX 1 

FUSES 1IN FILM EQUIPMENT 

CONTROLLER 

Neme gr Identification Fuse Roting (emps) 

ileon 5 
Heon 2 Link or 5 

=10V LOGIC 1 3 

=10V LOGIC 2 4 2 
+10V LOGIC 1 5 500 mA 
+10V LOGIC 2 6 500 mA 

The layout of the ebove fuses is: 

E 5 
h 6 

The fuses in the pover units, lower down in the Controller, 

, PK UNIT FS1 

FS2 

F83 

PG UNIT Fs1 

= t - 



HANDLER 

Name or Identification Fuse Rating (emps) 

Neon h ? 5 
Neon 2 Link or 5 

~20V MECH 3 5 
-20V R/W h 5 
-10V R/W 5 3 
-10V LOGIC 6 L 
+10V MECH T7 2 

+10V R/W 8 d 

+10V LOGIC 9 1 

The layout of the above fuses is: 

1 2 Link 3 h Link 5 6 Link 7 8 9 Tamp 

The lamp on the right indicates the output from the Servo Power 
Unit. 

The fuses in the power units, lower down in the Handler, are: 

PG UNIT FS1 34 

PK UNIT FS1 3A 

FS2 2A 

FS3 14 



The fuses in the Servo Power Unit, at the foot of the front of 
Handler, are: 

FS1 1A 

Fs2 24 

- 09 = 



T.1.8.57 

APPENDIX 2 

FUSES IN CARD READER AND LINE PRINTER 

CARD READER 

Pull the top of the front panel forward. Unhook the ring on 
the end of the chain, Lift the panel off. 

There are six fuses on the left of the centre upright: 
their ratings are: 

Mains (2 fuses) 3A glass 

6V 500 mA glass 

+6V 500 mA glass 

Lanp 500 mA glass 

Clutch 500 nA glass 

There are two fuses on the panel on the right of the centre 
upright: their retings are: 

-10V 3A glass 

+10V 3A glass 

To replace the front panel, fit the holes in the lower flange 
over the fixed pins,put the ring on the chain over the hook and then push 
the panel home so that it is held by the catch. 

LINE PRINTER 

There are seven fuses on the panel at the back. Each has its 
indicator lamp mounted on the fuseholder itself, and each position is marked 
with the rating of the fuse and the name of the circuit. 

= 40 e 



57.2.9.64 

READERS 

TELEPRINTER 

PUNCHES 

PANEL (UNDER) 

TO COMPUTER 

FIG. VIEW FROM REAR. PAPER TAPE STATION TYPE 3A 

FIG 1 



57.2.9.64 

LOUD SPEAKER 

WORD GENERATOR EAMPS 

Sus¥ 
= ooe e 

PORNeGlo w 
—, 

see o S 
o 

= oW sc 
oveRe 

RELEASE BUTTONS: 
PRESS TO RELEASE THE OTHER 
BUTTONS IN THE SAME ROW. 

FIG.2 KEYBOARD 

FIG.2 



57.2.9.64 

TYPICAL BEGINNING 

SWITCH ON (SEE DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS). 
THE ROUTINE INCLUDES PRESsING THE BATTERY 
ON sutron ano THE COMPUTER ON sutTON. 

PRESS THE Four RELEASE surtons. 

rress CLEAR STORE 

rress NORMAL 

rress OPERATE 

. WAIT AT LEAST |2 SECONDS (YOU CAN BE 
A oWeuTER PUTTING THE TAPE INTO THE READER). 

PRESS EITHER READ or OBEY. 

reLEeEAase CLEAR STORE 8y PRESSING 1T AGAIN. 

PUT FIRST TAPE INTO READER IF NOT ALREADY 
DONE (SEE DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS). 

PRESs READ 

PRESS FIRST "4 As SHOWN: THIS GIVES THE 
settine 40 O. 

rress OPERATE 

rress NORMAL 

rress OPERATE 

CAUTION orerations 3 10 6 asove 
MUST NOT BE PERFORMED BY A LEARNER UNLESS 
PERMISSION HAS BEEN OBTAINED FROM THE OPERATOR 

FIG.3 INTRODUCTION TO OPERATING IN CHARGE. 

FIG. 3 

SA ONONONONONORO 



57.2.9. 64. 

PUSH BUTTON, YELLOW Iluminated when reproducer 
16 under munual control 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, WHITE (no light) Single ehot contral of 
reproducer 

PUSH BUTTON, BLUE Thyminated when reproducer 
i6 under avtomatic control 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON GREEN Tluminated when reproducer 
has power on 

PUSH BUTTON, WHITE (no light—)—  Controle punch run-eut enh 

PUSH BUTTON, ORANGE — Illuminated for Reader Error 
or Load Condition 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON YELLOW — LTiluminated when under Manual 
confrot 

LAMP YELLOW Iluminated when & read or 
punch insfruction is present 

PUSH BUTTON, GREEN Tluminated when paper tape 
etation is QN 

PUSH BUTTOM, RED Tliminated utenpapes Saps 
station is OFF burt power 
available 

FIG.4 PTS. TYPe | CONTROL PANEL 

FIG.4 



57.72. 9564 

PUSH BUTTON, YELLOW Uluminated when reproducer 
i% under manual contrel 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, WHITE (no light) Single shol control of 
reproducer 

PUSH BUTTON, BLUE Tuminated when reproducer 
is under avtomalic confrol 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, GREEN TWuminated when reproducer 
has power on 

PUSH BUTTON, RED Tluminated when depressed 

PUSH BUTTOM, WH\TE. Tiluminated when Fape has 
run down 

PUSH BUTTON, ORANGE Tluminated For Reader Error 
or Lead Cendition 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON YELLOW-— Illuminated when under Manual 
control 

LAMP, RED —— — Tlluminated when a read or 
punch instruction is present 

PUSH BUTTON, GREEN Tlluminared when paper Yape 
efation is ON 

PUSH BUTTOM, RED —Illuminared when paper fape 
etation is OFF bul power 
available 

FIG. S PTS. TYPE 2 CONTROL  PANFI 

FIG.5 



57.2.9.64. 
PUSH BUTTON, GREY. Runs out tape on Punch 1. 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, BLUE,—— Selects 5 or 8 hole working mode. 

PUSH-PUSH, BUTTON  BL— lUlluEmin,ate d for Reader 2 on 
PUSH BUTTON, GREY, Runs out tape on Punch 2. 

8-hole working. 

PUSH-BUTTON, YELLOW. —— llluminated for Reader 2 error PUSH-FUSH BUTTON, BLUE.—— Selects 5 or 8 hole working mode. 
or load condition. 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, RED. — llluminated when the role of the two 
tape readers is interchanged. 

TWO-WAY SWITCH 

PUSH-PUSH BUTTON, BLUE,— llluminated for Reader 1 on Permitting use of the 
8-hole working. Telieprinter off-line. 

PUSH-BUTTON, YELLOW, —— lltuminated for Reader 1 error 
or load condition. 

THREE WAY SWITCHES — Provides facility of 
Outputing Computer onto 
any of the three 

Output Peripheral Devices. 

PUSH-PUSH BYTTON, YELLOW—.— liluminated when on manual control, 

LAMP, ORANGE, ——————   llluminated when a read or punch 
or print instruction is present. 

PUSH BUTTON, GREEN.———— lluminated when paper tape station 
is on. 

PUSH BUTTON, RED. ——— — llluminated when tape is off but power 
available. 

PTS TYPE 3A CONTROL PANEL 

FlG. 6 



57.2.9.64] 

+10V PUNCH 

oOO 
—10V READER 

(REAR) 

E 
(FRONT) 

FIG.9 VIEW FROM REAR FIG.10 VIEW FROM FRONT 

PAPER TAPE STATION ELECTRONICS UNIT 

FIG 9&10 

,_ r 
v 
o o
= s  n” 

F 0:0:0:0:0 
| õ + 

L F
> 2  F

' 2
)  

 
” o 

Ê 

o o E 
m z m 
E=  < o > 

* õ m 
E À 

n n n m 
o @ @ 

n 
@ 

o I @ G ” 
o “ 
o ” O = | 



57.2.9.64 

O + < 

É á 1 ] 
BE EG 
N | 
o) ; â 

Í 
Fs1 Fs3 Fss FS7 Fs9 Fsn Fs13 Fs15 FS7 Fs19 Fs21 

Fs2 FS4 Fs6 Fs8 Fst0 Fst2 FS14 FsS16 FSIB FS2O  Fs22 
T 

o) | f|  
BT6 Tz | 

PPl  ale s ' l 

O 

FIG.11 FUSES AT BACK OF POWER CABINET 
FIG.11 



57 2.9.64 

Fs24 FS26 Fs27 

FS25  Fsa3 

To 

FIG.12 FUSES IN FRONT OF POWER CABINET 

FIG.12 



57.2.9.64 

S 
[ &+10 900000 V RIW AMPS 1-20  AMPS 21-40 GEN. 1 GEN. 2 ínovms -10v. NL.A NL 2 BISTABLES  TH.2 TF.2 GEN 

e 5 
Q ' 0NE  ' 

O 
—=20V G.1 LoG 2 LOG. 3 LOG. 4 06,5 LoG. 6 106 7 Lde. 8 L06G. 8 INHIB. TH2 GEN ~20V.TRI 1G. } 

Q = 
O Q 
Q000000 OOO0OOO 

FIG.13 FUSES IN FRONT OF STORE CABINET 

FlG.13J